This is an interview with John Leslin by John
Walbert on date May 9, 1994, in Rockport, Texas,
concerning the Rural Development... What was it?
The Rural... What was the official title? Well,
the function is Rural Development. The name of the
organization is the National Area Development
Institute. The National Area Development
Institute. And... In interesting and
accumulating knowledge, I'm asking you to donate
this tape to me or to the Texas A&M Oral History
Collection in the University Archives. Is this
all right with you? Yes, of course. Okay, this is so
future historians, students, or researchers can
listen to it and are free to use any of the
statements in this interview. The thing we'd like
to start out with is where did rural development
start out? Whose idea was it, and how did you get
interested in it? Oh, rural development goes back
a long ways. It started out, I've seen literature
that goes back to the 1800s. And when you think in
terms of the canals that were put in and the roads
that were put in. So if you talk about rural, and
rural is defined as non-metropolitan or
non-urban, it's generally speaking areas that
primary activity was either in extraction
industries or in farming.
But when exactly did you get interested in joining
any sort of organization or agency to help out
rural communities? I joined the Spinneltop
Research Organization in Lexington, Kentucky, a
non-profit research entity that was established
by the Commonwealth of Kentucky to help in the
development of Kentucky. And that was in 63. By 65,
I was involved in doing studies in Appalachian,
Kentucky, to try to help identify opportunities
for job creation and opportunities for getting
communities to work together so that they could
get something done. We use the term scale, access,
and scope. You've got to have enough scale to do
something, and you have to have enough scope, a
range of activities in order for it to be cohesive.
And then you can't have everything, so you have to
have access to what you need. For example, in
Appalachia, you have to have access to the outside
world. The road system was so poor that it was
isolated. They've been in highways, Appalachian
development highways, and then they had access to
the real world. And whatever they did produce,
they could get it to the markets. But Really, the
National Area Development Institute was started
about 1968 as a part of spin-on-top research by
means of a grant from the Ford Foundation, which
supported us for about five years, along with
research contracts with half a dozen federal
agencies. How closely did you work with President
Johnson's Great Society programs to bring
Appalachia into the mainstream of American
society? I mean, he had read books about the other
America, and he had tried with this Great Society
program to bring in a lot of the persons who were
below the poverty line. How closely did you work
with some of the governing agencies under
President Johnson's administration? Well, you
remember the idea for helping Appalachia
occurred to john kennedy before his
assassination by virtue of the stopover he made in
west virginia and he saw the conditions there and
he had no idea things were like that when johnson
took over he had a commitment he made a commitment
to enacting the legislation that would carry out
the dream that john kennedy had And so it was
Kennedy's idea, Johnson put it into action. In
1968, if I'm not mistaken, the Economic
Development Administration was formed, the
Appalachian Rural Development, the Appalachian
Regional Development Program was started. The
Appalachian Regional Commission, excuse me, as a
governing body composed of governors of the 13
Appalachian states became active. And that's
when I got very active in the Appalachian region.
My first study was in the four poorest counties in
Appalachia, Lee, Wolf, Brethren, and Owsley
counties. And they were so isolated, they hadn't
joined the 19th century, literally. And it was a
fascinating experience to meet and talk with
these people, help them discover ways in which
they could do things they'd never thought about
doing before, as simple as Hey, they could put a
little bakery in town. Instead of buying it from
Louisville or Lexington, they could make it on and
keep that money in the community. One of the
fellows suggested there were some caves out there
and some old mines. Maybe they could grow
mushrooms. And we looked into that for them, and
some five years later, they have a major
mushroom-producing activity in an old coal mine.
It uses manure from the horse farms in Lexington
that is shipped in with the empty freight cars that
carry the coal out. See, that's how you get scale,
scope, and access to bring about something. And in
order to get the scale, you have to, generally
speaking, involve several political entities in
order to have enough resources, money, and
manpower, and political power. to get anything
accomplished.
So how did you find out a lot of this? Was it mostly in
the field interviews or working with probably any
government entities in the local level in
Kentucky, or pretty much y'all were just on your
own going out and interviewing persons or
interviewing farmers? How did you find out a lot of
this information? Was it just in the field work
mostly? Well, let me start by saying that... I had
the good fortune to work with a man who was the
brains that invented the notion of the
Appalachian Regional Commission and structured
it, and later became the representative of the
Appalachian governors in Washington to
administer the program. His name was John
Wissman. And John introduced me to the lore of East
Kentucky. He was an East Kentucky boy himself, and
the governor who put Spinnletop together was an
East Kentucky product. And so we had all the access
that we needed. And with regard to getting
information, there was very little statistical
information that you could go to and had any
meaning to it because you didn't have it. The
culture was so different that it didn't really
make sense. But what we did was we talked to people.
We interviewed individuals. We had collective
meetings by counties. I remember one in
particular in Wolf County. We called a meeting to
help them, you know, what do you call it,
brainstorm.
How can we create jobs out here? And the people were
all very polite, and finally this one big man, huge
guy, got up. His name was Mr. Stovall, and he was the
director of a private school, charity school out
there. He said, Mr. Leslie, we appreciate your
interest in helping us talk about this sort of
thing, but what we're here for is to find out do we
plant tomatoes or not this year? And I said, why?
And they had made applications for an EDA grant to
use some of the wasted energy to have hothouses in
which they could grow tomatoes, but they didn't
have an adequate marketing structure, so it
didn't get off the ground. So you were continually
blindsided by that kind of a situation. We went to
one county to see the county judge, and he'd been
arrested and was in county jail for bootlegging.
So we went to the banker, and I had taken with me a
young man who was a graduate student at the
University of Kentucky who was raised in that
area, and his Uncle was a congressman, and the
banker trusted him, and I would ask the banker a
question. He would look at Wibby Pratt, and Wibby
Pratt would nod his head. He'd turn around and
answer the question. If Wibby didn't nod his head,
he wouldn't answer the question.
So this was a land of education for me, and nobody in
those days knew anything really in a structured
way that you could go out and teach rural
development. And so this gave me the opportunity
to just have to start at ground zero with everybody
else. I had no academic background for this,
because at that time, there was no academic
training available. So you just used common
sense, put things together, and tried them out. If
it worked, you remembered it. Ultimately, we put
on some 13 national rural development leader
schools under the auspices of the Rural
Development Service of the Department of
Agriculture across the nation. about 100
leaders, rural leaders in each class, so that they
could learn how to achieve the scale, scope, and
access that is necessary to make something work.
Was there a particular position title that you
held during this time, or was it pretty much you
were the director of this whole geographic area,
or how did that work? Well, I'm talking Spindletop
Research and NAIDI, together because they were
together initially. Ultimately, NAIDI was spun
off from Spindletop Research. At Spindletop
Research, by the time I left there, I was vice
president of Spindletop Research and secretary
of the National Area Development Institute. When
we split it off, I became president of the National
Area Development Institute, headquartered in
Lexington, Kentucky. Ultimately, we moved it to
Rockport, Texas, and it was a nonprofit
organization. It was not a member of any
government or ties. It did research work for, oh,
golly, agencies in the federal government, USDA,
Economic Development Administration,
Environmental Protection Agency, Department of
Transportation. National Academy of Science,
the Appalachian Regional Commission, the
Department of Defense, Library of Congress,
Congressional Research Service, Office of
Economic Opportunity. We did research projects
for all of those federal agencies to help educate
them that their request, and they paid for it, to
come to grips with the rural thing. Everybody knew
about the urban mess, but they didn't And really,
that was the primary reason for establishing the
Nice Marietta Institute with Ford Foundation
support, because the Urban Institute was a mature
organization, and the rural areas had no
counterpart organization. And so you weren't
getting a balanced treatment.
How long did this work in Kentucky? Is it still
going on today? Or pretty much, was there a time
frame that most of this stayed on? It varies all
over the country. Kentucky has gone through all
sorts of gyrations. John Wiseman lives in
Kentucky, and he's consulted with all the
governors since those days and is currently
working with the governor. The area development
districts, multi-county organizations that
were established in Kentucky are still existent
and still active. And incidentally, at NAIDAC, we
did the initial development programs for each of
those sub-state districts, area development
districts, in conjunction with the people out in
the field, through this interview, getting them
involved. Because the one thing you learn in real
development, you can come in with the best idea in
the world and ain't nobody going to buy it. What you
got to do is have them come up with it and have
somebody emotionally committed to it, and then it
will work. Where else has this worked? Have you
worked with it in any area besides Kentucky or
since then? I was a consultant to the Rural
Development Service at the Department of
Agriculture for a number of years, hired through
NAIDAC. And that's where we conceived and put on
these schools for the department. And we covered
the United States and Hawaii. in the
administration of Jimmy Carter, we promoted the
use of state rural development committees in all
fifty states. I went around the country talking to
governors and talking to people in the rural
development business, showing them how this
could work. There was a series of goals that Carter
had promulgated, and then we reported and pushed
pull to get that going. When Carter left and Reagan
came in, things slowed down. Ultimately, in 1986,
the Rural Development Service, or Office of Rural
Development Policy—it had several names—was
unfunded, and it all went out of existence. I left
there at that time. By that time, I had joined the
Office of Rural Development Policy, a senior
policy coordination officer. And just, I
retired. What are some of the lasting ideas and
projects that you came up with there? I mean, was
there any sort of thing where you'd gone into
schools and tried to promote, instead of the focus
going directly into preparing for college, were
there any sort of vocational trainings for
schools that the... R-A-D-I had really looked
into? Well, early on, while it's been on top of
research, I did a study that's been called seminal
in developing the curriculum for a post-high
school vocational program, two-year program, in
central Kentucky for 17 counties. And that school
is still going. It took them about 10 years to get it
implemented. And the reason for that was They
didn't have the teachers who knew how to teach what
needed to be taught, and you couldn't just fire the
ones who were teaching what they were teaching.
You had to wait until they retired, so you couldn't
do it. Oh, I think one of the most memorable things
is I worked with a joint executive
branch—chaired, as a matter of fact—committee,
executive branch, House of Representatives, and
the Senate rewrite the Rural Development Act of
1972, get rid of five onerous reports that nobody
wanted, didn't read, and the paper wasn't
anything too good for an outhouse even. It was a
significant event, and it was a lot of fun working
on that. What are some of the lasting results that
you see? school there, but what are the other big
results that you really, when you look back at it,
you can say, hey, that was great to be a part of, and
boy, that was neat that that's happened, and it
really made a difference. What is probably the
biggest three things you're most proud of? Well,
you know, rural development is small scale, so
there are never any major things. I felt good about
seeing that mushroom production facility go in.
The Appalachian Highway system which we
developed a new technique for locating the route
of the Appalachian highway system on the basis of
what were the developmental opportunities
rather than what's the cheapest and shortest
distance, because the object was to open it up and
make it productive. Highway engineers just don't
think that way. We were successful in routing all
the major highways through Appalachia for
maximum developmental potential. And it turned
central Appalachia around, and it is better off
today significantly than it was in the 60s and 70s.
So those are typical. And I felt good about these
National Rural Development Leaders Schools. It
changed people's lives. They would come in and
say, boy, that was an experience, and I've changed
my occupation. I'm involved in this community
development stuff, and it all goes back to taking
that course. This was a five-day course, ten to
twelve hours a day. We believed in marathon
training and a combination of lectures and a work
project using a case study approach. So people got
so involved, and they really did have that, aha, I
see. And that makes an educator feel good when they
finally say, oh, that's what you're talking
about. That makes sense. And what background were
you able to draw upon this? Where were you
originally from and where was your education at?
Did it really apply to what you were doing there? I
got a degree in electrical engineering from the
University of Texas in 1948, 47 or 48.
and went to work with the General Electric Company
in the Knowles Atomic Power Laboratory. It
doesn't have much to do with rural development,
but my assignment was in employee relations,
management development, communications,
training. I developed a graduate education
program in conjunction with RPI, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, leading to a master's
degree in nuclear engineering. which was a
seminal event. The schools were behind. They had
to learn from the industry what was going on. And,
you know, rural development is not complicated.
It's pretty simple, and it's common sense. And
once you see that you've got to get a lot of people
together and find ways for them to get behind
something, and there's no simple way to do it. It's
just the learning that you got to give credit to get
credit and you got to give credit to get action it
can't be your idea it's got to be their idea and you
learn a few of those simple things and the process
you start out by finding out what are the assets of
this area what do they got that they could might
make some use of and what are the interests of
people there and then when you What are the
opportunities to value add to agricultural
products? Don't just cut the beans down, can them
and process them there. When you catch the fish,
process the fish. And that has gone on all across
the United States. Small companies, now that we
have transportation systems the way they are,
Montana, for example, is a delightful place to
live. And many high-technical outfits are
located in Montana because they like it. And with
Overnight Federal Express, they can compete with
anybody. Their living costs are less, and they're
living in a lifestyle they want to live. So rural
areas offer a lot. On the other hand, if you want the
excitement of a major metropolitan area, dodge
bullets every night when you're coming home,
while you can stay in these big cities and have your
doors all locked up and live a scared-to-death
life, which is not very appealing to some people.
In Texas, we've got an extensive farm-to-market
road system for its agriculture products. We've
got a very active agriculture commissioner
presently, Rick Perry, who's with the new North
American Free Trade Agreement, is really pushing
Texas agricultural products to Mexico since they
are our biggest trading partner. Now that you've
retired and are now in Texas, do you see a lot of the
goals that you looked at trying to implement in
this 1960s in Kentucky, did you see these goals?
that you looked at, are they pretty much
paralleled and been made here in Texas? I've
really not gotten close to what goes on in Texas,
I'm ashamed to say. It seems like it's always
you're an expert when you get 200 miles away rather
than when you're there. And I get involved in the
local community here. I started a Good Samaritan
organization for emergency assistance to the
poor and using the principles that we taught in
rural development. And the community just bought
it. It was their idea, and I just got them together
and talked and wore them out until they decided to
do something, and it worked. So Texas' worst roads
are better than most states' good roads when you
get away from the interstate system. But Texas has
the finest road system in the world. in my opinion.
It doesn't have access problems except for
distance. When you're trying to get to El Paso, I
don't care how good the road is, it's a long ways.
Recent trends in agriculture that I've been
seeing in Texas through being at Texas A&M It's
tending to go more towards genetically altered
vegetables, and so you have a juicier, bigger
tomato than, you know, we have the 10-15 onion and a
lot of these real kind of fancy technological
advances. Did the University of Kentucky ever
really present something like this to your
research when y'all were working, to these
small... places in Appalachia, did they come in
and say, hey, you know, we've got this idea and this
new crop, and we want to really have a testing
ground. Do you all want to try this? Well, most of
that activity was done by the Extension Service,
and that is quite dependent
on the interest and the expertise of the Extension
agent that is responsible for an area, and some of
them have been very aggressive in in promoting the
latest ways to
produce and process agricultural products. By
and large, the Rural Development Service, NAIDI,
were concerned primarily with non-agricultural
activities because the agriculture thing goes on
its own pretty well. It was the absence of of
economic activity that was killing them because
the efficiency of agriculture production has
gone up so high now that its employment base is very
low. And if you're looking for employment, you
really have to look at processing or something
like that, not genetic devices. What you're going
to find out there is it's going to cause less
employment because it's easier to produce and you
get a higher yield. for the same amount of labor,
and so you're market dependent. You see what I
mean? I noticed looking at some of the great
society agencies that started and some of the New
Deal policies that continued on, there was the
Rural Electric Council, which had provided
electricity to rural Americans. And a lot of
places, at least in Texas, have formed electric
cooperatives to provide electricity to run some
of the local rural businesses. Was this a big
factor in some of the Appalachian areas, trying to
get some of the government or try to get the people
to form an electric cooperative to get everyone
power, or did pretty much everyone have it, or what
were their thoughts on it? The Real Electric
Administration has been very active in real
development since its inception. And The real
problem that they face now is there are a lot of
people who feel it's not fair that rural electrics
can loan money at a lower rate and therefore, in a
sense, be subsidized while other power companies
can't. Now, once the system was built, the
maintenance problems aren't as expensive as they
were when it was first put in. My wife was raised out
in west Texas on a ranch, and they didn't get
electricity until the mid-50s. Had it not been for
REA, they still wouldn't have electricity. It's
impossible. You just really can't quantify that
in any isolated area, which west Texas is isolated
by distance, and Appalachia by the wrinkled
mountains and the terrain. And so wherever there
was a problem that made provision of electric
current not economical going the private way,
this is the only way they could do it. But that need
is really not as much as it is, and there's been a
constant force in Congress to reduce the subsidy
that goes in that direction. You mentioned that
you retired in 1986. And what have you seen since
then, since the organizations you work with that
pretty much remain unfunded? And what has the
organization done since your retirement? Or has
it pretty much ceased to exist? And has any other
organization picked up the slack where you all
left off? Well, I retired, but that doesn't mean
I've quit working. I've been a consultant to the
Future Farmers of America, where we developed for
them several programs. And the major program that
we worked with them on was their community
development program. They had chapters from all
over the United States compete for community
development or area development or rural
development, whatever you want to call it. And
they had some projects that you wouldn't believe
that they got started in rural areas.
Traditionally, Future Farms of America has been
just agricultural and stock shows and that sort of
thing and agricultural products. They brought it
into the fold of something that they could get
involved in the community with, and they ran
tractor safety programs that we designed for
them, a double line for safety for use of seat belts
and not drinking while driving. Programs were
promulgated, all in the sense of community
development in the future parts of America. The
National Association of State Development
agencies nasdaq they call it i've consulted with
them most recently in montana helping the
governor of montana put on town meetings in 11
cities in montana which was an exciting
experience it was again just people to people
getting their views finding where there was
consensus seeing how to build on the consensus and
move on from there it's rarely a a big announcement
that the world has suddenly got better. It's a lot
of little bitty things where things improve. And
you look back 10 years later and say, boy, I don't
know whether you want to call it improved or not,
but when we moved to Rockport in 1975, there was one
traffic light in town. Now we have 11. You're going
to vary as to whether the old timers don't think
that's much improvement
there. But now we're going to bypass around the
town. we can get rid of our stoplights. You
mentioned with the safety and then the traffic
lights, some of the results here, but what were the
goals that you looked at? Nate, what were the goals
that you looked at? I mean, all the other, the hard
work really notwithstanding, what were the goals
that you were working for? What was the ideal
result? Basically, it was to make our rural areas a
better place to work, live, play, and pray. In
other words, the quality of life is your goal. Why
should the rural people have a lousy quality of
life? And so I think the quality of life has
improved considerably throughout the United
States in rural areas, perhaps at a faster rate
than in the cities, given their current
propensity to crime and the underclass
development and some almost intractable
problems. Matter of fact, the thing that
interested me the most and got me involved in rural
development was we operated on a scale where you
could make something happen and you could study
the problem. When you try to do the same thing in New
York City, Washington, D.C., Boston, that's
breaking it down to neighborhoods. In rural
areas, we put things together to build it up enough
to have enough scale. In metropolitan areas,
they've got to break it down to get it to enough
scale that you can even fool with it. And then
there's so many interacting forces that you don't
have in the rural setting. So it's a lot tougher to
solve those urban problems than it is the rural
problems. They have their problems, but I'll take
those any day over the metropolitan area. Well, I
think that pretty much concludes the interview.
Is there anything else you'd like to leave future
researchers, students, and listeners to this
interview, leave them with about rural
development? Well, I guess if a guy with as little
formal training as I had, and
I didn't realize this at the time, but I just had a
tremendous opportunity to learn. And I learned
from so many people. I didn't learn how to do a
regression analysis, but I never had to do one. I
had people that worked for me who could do a
regression analysis. so many things in life where
you need the technical knowledge, but there are
other things you need, some other kind of skills to
put the technical knowledge to work, to get people
to work together on it, so that two brains are
better than one, maybe equivalent to three. You
know, you're not limited by the zero-sums game in
development. You always increase the size of the
pie rather than define how you divide it, which
traditional economic models apply. I don't know
whether you remember Leon Tiff or not, the guy who
invented input-output models. Well, I
participated on a panel he chaired in the Senate
for a hearing, and everybody up there except me had
Ph.D.s in economics. But I raised questions. If
the data is no good, you can model all you want to,
and we have a data problem. I made a talk once to the
National Society. I can't remember the name of it.
These systems people
reported that the 1970 census showed that 72
people commuted daily to Hawaii from Los Angeles
by automobile. How do you do that? Data error.
Displace concreteness. When you see numbers on a
page, it gives them some validity. It's a rare
person who likes to deal with getting the data,
because then they're aware of the soft spots in the
data. But if they take somebody else's data, well,
that's fine. Those are hard numbers. Two is two and
three is three. So, you know, it's a tough one. But
anyway, this Lintef guy was quite interesting,
and he spent more time talking to me than he did to
any of the people after it was over. Because he
said, I don't ever get the people who are as close to
the problem as you are. You know, we in the ivory
towers
just don't have the opportunity to get their hands
on it and trying to quantify things. So I think that
was an insight worth having. Thank you, Mr.
Leslie. Well, thank you, John. Good luck to you.